README.md, before:

SWIFT: SPH WIth Fine-grained inter-dependent Tasking
====================================================

[![Build Status](https://gitlab.cosma.dur.ac.uk/jenkins/job/GNU%20SWIFT%20build/badge/icon)](https://gitlab.cosma.dur.ac.uk/jenkins/job/GNU%20SWIFT%20build/)

SWIFT is a gravity and SPH solver designed to run cosmological simulations
on peta-scale machines, scaling well up to 10's of thousands of compute
node.

More general information about SWIFT is available on the project
[webpages](http://www.swiftsim.com).

For information on how to _run_ SWIFT, please consult the onboarding guide
available [here](http://www.swiftsim.com/onboarding.pdf). This includes
dependencies, and a few examples to get you going.

We suggest that you use the latest release branch of SWIFT, rather than the
current master branch as this will change rapidly. We do, however, like to
ensure that the master branch will build and run.

This GitHub repository is designed to be an issue tracker, and a space for
the public to submit patches through pull requests. It is synchronised with
the main development repository that is available on the
[ICC](http://icc.dur.ac.uk)'s GitLab server which is available
[here](https://gitlab.cosma.dur.ac.uk/swift/swiftsim).

Please feel free to submit issues to this repository, or even pull
requests. We will try to deal with them as soon as possible, but as the
core development team is quite small this could take some time.

Contribution Guidelines
-----------------------

The SWIFT source code uses a variation of the 'Google' formatting style.
The script 'format.sh' in the root directory applies the clang-format-5.0
tool with our style choices to all the SWIFT C source file. Please apply
the formatting script to the files before submitting a pull request.

Please check that the test suite still runs with your changes applied before
submitting a pull request and add relevant unit tests probing the correctness
of new modules. An example of how to add a test to the suite can be found by
considering the tests/testGreeting case.

Any contributions that fail any of the automated tests will not be accepted.
Contributions that include tests of the proposed modules (or any current ones!)
are highly encouraged.

Runtime parameters
------------------

```
 Welcome to the cosmological hydrodynamical code
    ______       _________________
   / ___/ |     / /  _/ ___/_  __/
   \__ \| | /| / // // /_   / /
  ___/ /| |/ |/ // // __/  / /
 /____/ |__/|__/___/_/    /_/
 SPH With Inter-dependent Fine-grained Tasking

 Version : 0.8.2
 Website: www.swiftsim.com
 Twitter: @SwiftSimulation

See INSTALL.swift for install instructions.

Usage: swift [options] [[--] param-file]
   or: swift [options] param-file
   or: swift_mpi [options] [[--] param-file]
   or: swift_mpi [options] param-file

Parameters:

    -h, --help                        show this help message and exit

  Simulation options:
  
    -b, --feedback                    Run with stars feedback.
    -c, --cosmology                   Run with cosmological time integration.
    --temperature                     Run with temperature calculation.
    -C, --cooling                     Run with cooling (also switches on --temperature).
    -D, --drift-all                   Always drift all particles even the ones
                                      far from active particles. This emulates
                                      Gadget-[23] and GIZMO's default behaviours.
    -F, --star-formation	      Run with star formation.
    -g, --external-gravity            Run with an external gravitational potential.
    -G, --self-gravity                Run with self-gravity.
    -M, --multipole-reconstruction    Reconstruct the multipoles every time-step.
    -s, --hydro                       Run with hydrodynamics.
    -S, --stars                       Run with stars.
    -B, --black-holes                 Run with black holes.
    -u, --fof                         Run Friends-of-Friends algorithm to
                                      perform black hole seeding.
    -x, --velociraptor                Run with structure finding.
    --limiter                         Run with time-step limiter.

  Control options:
  
    -a, --pin                         Pin runners using processor affinity.
    -d, --dry-run                     Dry run. Read the parameter file, allocates
                                      memory but does not read the particles
                                      from ICs. Exits before the start of time
                                      integration. Checks the validity of
                                      parameters and IC files as well as memory
                                      limits.
    -e, --fpe                         Enable floating-point exceptions (debugging
                                      mode).
    -f, --cpu-frequency=<str>         Overwrite the CPU frequency (Hz) to be
                                      used for time measurements.
    -n, --steps=<int>                 Execute a fixed number of time steps.
                                      When unset use the time_end parameter
                                      to stop.
    -o, --output-params=<str>         Generate a default output parameter
                                      file.
    -P, --param=<str>                 Set parameter value, overiding the value
                                      read from the parameter file. Can be used
                                      more than once {sec:par:value}.
    -r, --restart                     Continue using restart files.
    -t, --threads=<int>               The number of threads to use on each MPI
                                      rank. Defaults to 1 if not specified.
    -T, --timers=<int>                Print timers every time-step.
    -v, --verbose=<int>               Run in verbose mode, in MPI mode 2 outputs
                                      from all ranks.
    -y, --task-dumps=<int>            Time-step frequency at which task analysis
                                      files and/or tasks are dumped.
    -Y, --threadpool-dumps=<int>      Time-step frequency at which threadpool
                                      tasks are dumped.

See the file examples/parameter_example.yml for an example of parameter file.

Commit message:

Fix generation of parameter file for selecting the output

README.md, after:

SWIFT: SPH WIth Fine-grained inter-dependent Tasking
====================================================

[![Build Status](https://gitlab.cosma.dur.ac.uk/jenkins/job/GNU%20SWIFT%20build/badge/icon)](https://gitlab.cosma.dur.ac.uk/jenkins/job/GNU%20SWIFT%20build/)

SWIFT is a gravity and SPH solver designed to run cosmological simulations
on peta-scale machines, scaling well up to 10's of thousands of compute
node.

More general information about SWIFT is available on the project
[webpages](http://www.swiftsim.com).

For information on how to _run_ SWIFT, please consult the onboarding guide
available [here](http://www.swiftsim.com/onboarding.pdf). This includes
dependencies, and a few examples to get you going.

We suggest that you use the latest release branch of SWIFT, rather than the
current master branch as this will change rapidly. We do, however, like to
ensure that the master branch will build and run.

This GitHub repository is designed to be an issue tracker, and a space for
the public to submit patches through pull requests. It is synchronised with
the main development repository that is available on the
[ICC](http://icc.dur.ac.uk)'s GitLab server which is available
[here](https://gitlab.cosma.dur.ac.uk/swift/swiftsim).

Please feel free to submit issues to this repository, or even pull
requests. We will try to deal with them as soon as possible, but as the
core development team is quite small this could take some time.

Contribution Guidelines
-----------------------

The SWIFT source code uses a variation of the 'Google' formatting style.
The script 'format.sh' in the root directory applies the clang-format-5.0
tool with our style choices to all the SWIFT C source file. Please apply
the formatting script to the files before submitting a pull request.

Please check that the test suite still runs with your changes applied before
submitting a pull request and add relevant unit tests probing the correctness
of new modules. An example of how to add a test to the suite can be found by
considering the tests/testGreeting case.

Any contributions that fail any of the automated tests will not be accepted.
Contributions that include tests of the proposed modules (or any current ones!)
are highly encouraged.

Runtime parameters
------------------

```
 Welcome to the cosmological hydrodynamical code
    ______       _________________
   / ___/ |     / /  _/ ___/_  __/
   \__ \| | /| / // // /_   / /
  ___/ /| |/ |/ // // __/  / /
 /____/ |__/|__/___/_/    /_/
 SPH With Inter-dependent Fine-grained Tasking

 Version : 0.8.2
 Website: www.swiftsim.com
 Twitter: @SwiftSimulation

See INSTALL.swift for install instructions.

Usage: swift [options] [[--] param-file]
   or: swift [options] param-file
   or: swift_mpi [options] [[--] param-file]
   or: swift_mpi [options] param-file

Parameters:

    -h, --help                        show this help message and exit

  Simulation options:
  
    -b, --feedback                    Run with stars feedback.
    -c, --cosmology                   Run with cosmological time integration.
    --temperature                     Run with temperature calculation.
    -C, --cooling                     Run with cooling (also switches on --temperature).
    -D, --drift-all                   Always drift all particles even the ones
                                      far from active particles. This emulates
                                      Gadget-[23] and GIZMO's default behaviours.
    -F, --star-formation	      Run with star formation.
    -g, --external-gravity            Run with an external gravitational potential.
    -G, --self-gravity                Run with self-gravity.
    -M, --multipole-reconstruction    Reconstruct the multipoles every time-step.
    -s, --hydro                       Run with hydrodynamics.
    -S, --stars                       Run with stars.
    -B, --black-holes                 Run with black holes.
    -u, --fof                         Run Friends-of-Friends algorithm to
                                      perform black hole seeding.
    -x, --velociraptor                Run with structure finding.
    --limiter                         Run with time-step limiter.

  Control options:
  
    -a, --pin                         Pin runners using processor affinity.
    -d, --dry-run                     Dry run. Read the parameter file, allocates
                                      memory but does not read the particles
                                      from ICs. Exits before the start of time
                                      integration. Checks the validity of
                                      parameters and IC files as well as memory
                                      limits.
    -e, --fpe                         Enable floating-point exceptions (debugging
                                      mode).
    -f, --cpu-frequency=<str>         Overwrite the CPU frequency (Hz) to be
                                      used for time measurements.
    -n, --steps=<int>                 Execute a fixed number of time steps.
                                      When unset use the time_end parameter
                                      to stop.
    -o, --output-params=<str>         Generate a parameter file with the options
                                      for selecting the output fields.
    -P, --param=<str>                 Set parameter value, overiding the value
                                      read from the parameter file. Can be used
                                      more than once {sec:par:value}.
    -r, --restart                     Continue using restart files.
    -t, --threads=<int>               The number of threads to use on each MPI
                                      rank. Defaults to 1 if not specified.
    -T, --timers=<int>                Print timers every time-step.
    -v, --verbose=<int>               Run in verbose mode, in MPI mode 2 outputs
                                      from all ranks.
    -y, --task-dumps=<int>            Time-step frequency at which task analysis
                                      files and/or tasks are dumped.
    -Y, --threadpool-dumps=<int>      Time-step frequency at which threadpool
                                      tasks are dumped.

See the file examples/parameter_example.yml for an example of parameter file.
